The President:
At this time last year, amidst headlines about banks on the
verge of collapse and job
losses of 700,000 a month,
we received another troubling
piece of news about our economy.
Our economy was shrinking
at an alarming rate --
the largest six-month
decline in 50 years.
Our factories and farms
were producing less;
our businesses
were selling less;
and more job losses
were on the horizon.
One year later, according to
numbers released this past week,
this trend has reversed itself.
For the past six months, our
economy has been growing again.
And last quarter, it grew more
quickly than at any time in the
past six years.
This is a sign of progress.
And it's an affirmation of the
difficult decisions we made last
year to pull our financial
system back from the brink and
get our economy moving again.
But when so many people
are still struggling --
when one in ten Americans
still can't find work,
and millions more are working
harder and longer for less --
our mission isn't just
to grow the economy.
It's to grow jobs for
folks who want them,
and ensure wages that are
rising for those who have them.
It's not just about improvements
we see in quarterly statistics,
but ones people feel
in their daily lives --
a bigger paycheck;
more security;
the ability to give your kids
a decent shot in life and still
have enough to
retire on one day.
That's why job creation will be
our number one focus in 2010.
We'll put more Americans
back to work rebuilding our
infrastructure all
across the country.
And since the true engines
of job creation are America's
businesses, I've proposed tax
credits to help them hire new
workers, raise wages, and invest
in new plants and equipment.
I also want to eliminate all
capital gains taxes on small
business investment, and help
small businesses to get the
loans they need to open their doors and expand their operations.
But as we work to create jobs,
it is critical that we rein in
the budget deficits we've been
accumulating for far too long --
deficits that won't just burden
our children and grandchildren,
but could damage our markets,
drive up our interest rates,
and jeopardize our
recovery right now.
There are certain core
principles our families and
businesses follow when they sit
down to do their own budgets.
They accept that they can't get
everything they want and they
focus on what they really need.
They make tough decisions
and sacrifice for their kids.
They don't spend
what they don't have,
and they make do with
what they've got.
It's time their
government did the same.
That's why I'm pleased that the
Senate has just restored the
pay-as-you-go law that was
in place back in the 1990s.
It's no coincidence that
we ended that decade with a
$236 billion surplus.
But then we did
away with PAYGO --
and we ended the next decade
with a $1.3 trillion deficit.
Reinstating this law will
help us get back on track,
ensuring that every
time we spend,
we find somewhere else to cut.
I've also proposed
a spending freeze,
so that as we increase
investments in things we need,
like job creation and
middle class tax cuts --
we cut spending
on those we don't,
like tax cuts for oil companies
and investment fund managers,
and programs that are redundant,
obsolete, or simply ineffective.
Spending related to
Medicare, Medicaid,
and Social Security
will not be affected --
and neither will
national security --
but all other discretionary
government programs will.
Finally, I've called for a
bi-partisan Fiscal Commission --
a panel of Democrats and
Republicans who would sit down
and hammer out concrete
deficit-reduction proposals by a
certain deadline.
Because we've heard plenty of
talk and a lot of yelling on TV
about deficits, and it's now
time to come together and make
the painful choices we need
to eliminate those deficits.
This past week, 53 Democrats
and Republicans voted for this
commission in the Senate.
But it failed when seven
Republicans who had co-sponsored
this idea in the first place
suddenly decided to vote against it.
Now, it's one thing to have an
honest difference of opinion
about something.
I will always respect those who
take a principled stand for what
they believe, even if
I disagree with them.
But what I won't accept is
changing positions because it's
good politics.
What I won't accept is
opposition for opposition's sake.
We can't have a serious discussion and take meaningful
action to create jobs and
control our deficit if
politicians just do what's
necessary to win the next
election instead of what's
best for the next generation.
I'm eager and ready to work
with anyone who's serious about
solving the real problems facing
our people and our country.
I welcome anyone who comes to
the table in good faith to help
get our economy moving again and
fulfill this country's promise.
That's why we were elected
in the first place.
That's what the American
people expect and deserve.
And that's what we must deliver.
Thanks so much.